In this video, I want to discuss strings in a bit more detail,
and also introduce the idea of storing values in variables.
We'll cover variables in the video after next, but I'll actually introduce them here.
So we'll continue using our HelloWorld project, but let's create a new Python file for this video.
So we're going to open our project pane.
I'm gonna right click on the project name,
click on New and choose Python File,
and I'll call this one strings.
And I'll just close the project pane by double clicking on the file name here, strings.py,
so we can see what we're doing.
Now in Python, strings can be enclosed in either double or single quotes, as I've mentioned previously.
Let's just go through and type in a couple of examples, noting that these are all valid
Python strings. So the first one we're going to
start with, "Today is a good day to learn Python".
You can see that's valid. Next line, using single quotes, "Python is fun".
Next line, print double quotes Python
single quote s strings are easy to use,
and on line 4 I'm going to type print
parentheses again,
single quote, We can even include double quotes, quotes, in strings. Alright.
So unlike some other languages like Perl, there's no difference between single or double quotes in Python.
However, if you start a string with one type then you must finish it with the same type, and
we've talked about that previously.
If you need to include a single quote in a string, then use double quotes to enclose the string,
like in the third example above.
And similarly,
if your string will include double quotes, then enclose the string in single quotes, as we've done on line 4.
Now we can also concatenate strings to make longer ones, using plus.
Let's go ahead and type print parentheses double quotes hello +
double quotes again, world with a space at the start there.
So that joins the two words together, to make the single string, hello world.
So that's called string concatenation.
Python isn't going to perform addition on the two strings. It just joins them together or concatenates them.
So I'm gonna run the program to check that it prints what we expect.
But remember to check the drop-down in the top right hand corner,
and right-clicking the editor to run the correct program, otherwise you'll run helloworld.py by mistake.
So if we do that without changing that, and run it,
note that we're getting the Hello World output, and not the program output from this program,
which could be a bit confusing for you. So you want to right-click in here instead,
click on run the first time.
By doing that, we're now running this program, and noting that in the top right hand corner,
the drop down has now, or is now showing strings, being the current program that we're running.
And you can see that in the case of line 5,
we've got hello world showing - the
two strings concatenated together to form one string -
and we've got the single quotes and double quotes showing, as per the examples on lines 3 and 4,
and the rest of the text, as per what we've set up.
Alright, so we can also store the strings in variables, and then concatenation makes more sense.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So we can come down here,
and I can type greeting equals Hello in double quotes, name equals, we'll type Bruce in double quotes.
I'm gonna put a comment here, hash, if we want a space, we can add that too.
And we type print left and right parenthesis, and within the parentheses we can type greeting,
noting that I've just typed a g and IntelliJ helpfully gives us a menu that we can select from, and if we've got the
menu options selected that we want, we
can use the up and down arrow keys, by the way.
But greeting is what we want. I'm going to press ENTER there. That saves us a bit of typing.
So I can then add + single quote with a space in it , + I can put it in n for name, press ENTER,
and if we run the program now,
we can see the strings have been concatenated to produce the output.
So to make this even more useful, we could use the input function to read in a name from the keyboard.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So where we've got name defined on line 7, let's change that to be name equals,
and we'll delete the text Bruce in double quotes
and instead we'll make an input parenthesis double quotes, Please enter your name, and a space.
Then our closing double quote and right parenthesis.
The input function displays the text provided to it, then waits for text to be entered at the keyboard.
So I'm going to right click and run the program.
Now when you run the program, click into the run window with the mouse,
or you can use alt 4 on a PC before typing your name.
So I'm going to come into here and I'm just going to double click it.
I'm going to type Tim with a capital T.
When you press Enter, the text you typed
is stored in the variable name.
This is the code on line 7 and then used by the print function to show the greeting.
So if we press ENTER, we can now see the output, Hello Tim.
So that's pretty cool. Our programs can get input from the user. To do that we call the input function,
and then assign the value it returns to
a variable.
I mentioned function return values, in the slide at the end of the last video,
so here the return value of the input function, is whatever text the user enters.
So we assign that to the variable,
name on line 7.
Assignment is done using the equals symbol, and anything on the right of the equals symbol is evaluated first,
before the assignment happens.
So looking at line 7, that means the input function is called first.
When it finishes, which happens when the user presses enter,
the value it returns is assigned to our variable name.
So let's actually come in here and type in print below the input line, print greeting,
I probably should have done this before,
greeting + name,
because I've added the space down here on line 11, but I didn't do it on line 8 to show you what it's like without the space.
So let's run that again.
Click into the run window, Tim, and you see HelloTim without the space, and also Hello Tim with the space.
So as you can see now, on lines 8 and 11,
the value of name is printed out.
Name isn't enclosed in speech marks, and again that's because it's not a string literal.
It's the name of a variable, and Python uses the value whenever it sees the name, name in our case, in our code.
We'll talk about variables more, in a video after the next one.
First though, I want to finish discussing strings by looking at the escape character,
and we'll be doing that in the next video.